---
layout: page
title: Research
subtitle: What I do for fun (and to make money).
published: true
---
**Plain Language Summary**

My research is focused on using the oxygen isotope composition of surface ocean waters to estimate rates of marine photosynthesis/carbon fixation. Photosynthetic organisms use inorganic carbon, water, and sunlight to produce simple organic compounds and oxygen. Understanding how photosynthesis is quantitatively distributed throughout the world ocean is important when trying to understand how the global carbon and oxygen cycles work. Oxygen has three isotopes, <sup>16</sup>O, <sup>17</sup>O, and <sup>18</sup>O. Isotopes of elements have the same number of protons (atomic number), but different numbers of neutrons (atomic mass). The way that elements interact chemically is determine by their atomic number, but differences in the numbers of protons (and thus mass) lead to slight different in the rates that different isotopes interact in chemical systems. This allows ratios of the various oxygen stable isotopes to be used as tracers of Earth system processes by comparing ratios of oxygen isotopes in different earth materials. By comparing the distinct oxygen isotope signatures of atmospheric air vs that produced by photosynthesis in marine surface waters, we can determine rates of photosynthesis throughout the world ocean, which helps us constrain where oxygen is being produced globally. Better understanding how primary productivity is distributed throughout the ocean is important not only for improving our scientific understanding of the ocean, but also in guiding how we approach mitigating the effects of climate change on the world ocean. One important, widely-believed consequence of climate change is the decrease in global marine oxygen levels through a number of processes, leading to the spread of oxygen minimum zones (OMZs) throughout the ocean. Accurate data about the rate of gross oxygen productivity are useful in characterizing the processes affecting OMZs through the ocean, and could help us understand how OMZ dynamics could change in the future.

**Complicated Summary**

Primary productivity is defined as the rate at which photosynthetic organisms synthesize organic compounds. Primary production by photosynthetic algae in the ocean provides the fundamental chemical building blocks of the marine ecosystem. Primary productivity also produces more than half of the oxygen in the atmosphere, making it an important source of the gas that complex life needs in order to survive. Marine primary productivity is a major sink for fossil fuel carbon emissions and is dramatically affected by human actions such as increased nutrient runoff from rivers. Improving constraints on the magnitude and distribution of primary productivity in the ocean today is important when projecting how human actions will affect the world ocean in the future.

Marine primary productivity can be estimated by determining the production rate of photosynthetic oxygen in the ocean. The triple-oxygen isotope composition of a sample is defined as the vertical offset in δ<sup>17</sup>O-δ<sup>18</sup>O space between the sample and a chosen reference slope. The oxygen triple-isotope (<sup>17</sup>Δ) proxy of marine productivity quantifies gross oxygen productivity (GOP), the rate of photosynthetic O<sub>2</sub> production, by exploiting the difference between the triple-oxygen isotope composition of atmospheric and photosynthetic O<sub>2</sub> to determine the rate of oxygen production from in-situ measurements of O<sub>2</sub> dissolved in seawater. Measurements of <sup>18</sup>O<sup>18</sup>O in dissolved oxygen (Δ<sub>36</sub>, the “clumped” isotope signature) could be used in a similar way as the oxygen triple-isotope proxy to constrain gross oxygen productivity because both biological and atmospheric O<sub>2</sub> also have distinct Δ<sub>36</sub> signatures.

Our group believes that past determinations of the reference slope for <sup>17</sup>Δ measurements, λ = 0.518, were compromised by previously overlooked analytical artifacts, and is thus likely too small by 0.004. In the worst-case scenario, past GOP estimates using the <sup>17</sup>Δ proxy could be ~40% too high, because every 0.001 change in the λ value leads to a ~10% change in the calculated <sup>17</sup>Δ. This λ value also conflicts with theoretical results modeling the binding of O<sub>2</sub> onto cytochrome c oxidase, a major fractionating step in microbial respiration. Recent work has shown that λ is temperature dependent, at least in the model organism E. coli. These uncertainties in λ need to be addressed to improve our interpretations of GOP using the triple-oxygen proxy.

I will test the following hypotheses by making experimental determinations of the effects of microbial respiration on the five isotopologues of oxygen. **H1**: The observed fractionation of <sup>17</sup>O relative to <sup>18</sup>O through normal (dark) respiration is similar for many microbes, but its mean value is not 0.518 as previously suggested. **H2**: The λ value for marine microbes is positively correlated with temperature/growth rate, but does not show the  same dependence as previously determined for E. coli. **H3**: Determining the fractionation of <sup>17</sup>O<sup>18</sup>O and <sup>18</sup>O<sup>18</sup>O relative to <sup>16</sup>O<sup>16</sup>O through respiration in important marine microbes will constrain the pathways governing isotope fractionation and allow clumped O<sub>2</sub> measurements to be used as an independent GOP proxy.

I will conduct a series of incubation experiments on the model bacterium *E. coli*, the marine bacteria *Alteromonas macleodii* and *Cobetia marina*, and natural plankton assemblages from Lake Houston and the Texas Gulf Coast. Measuring how the proportions of the five O<sub>2</sub> isotopologues change as the respiration experiments progress will be used to constrain oxygen isotope systematics. We will determine λ values of the organisms to examine the variability of this value. If the mass fractionation exponent is effectively universal (as has been asserted previously), we will compare our measured value with the value λ = 0.518 that is currently used to measure marine <sup>17</sup>Δ values (**H1**).7 We will determine the temperature/growth rate dependence of λ by performing respiration experiments in an environmentally relevant temperature range spanning 10˚C to 40˚C (**H2**). We will also determine the fractionation of <sup>17</sup>O<sup>18</sup>O and <sup>18</sup>O<sup>18</sup>O relative to <sup>16</sup>O<sup>16</sup>O by respiration for the microbes (**H3**).

This work will allow us to determine to what degree previous estimates of GOP were inaccurate and will provide the fundamental respiration fractionation relationships needed to fix these errors. It will also help resolve discrepancies between estimates of gross oxygen productivity using <sup>14</sup>C incorporation measurements, satellite based primary productivity estimates, and global biogeochemical model predictions. The creation and application of the clumped oxygen isotope proxy of marine productivity will provide another constraint on GOP estimates, and could be used alongside triple oxygen isotope measurements as a check on marine productivity estimates.
