---
layout: post
published: false
title: On Biographical History
date: '2019-06-08'
---
Today I'd like to talk about why I enjoy history so much. In particular, why I think biography is one of the best ways for people to learn about history. That's a child, I was greatly entertained by reading different historical accounts, and also just learning about history through speaking with my grandmother, whose family, she's from Cuba. And I remember, a lot of times, I would just sit around her apartment and kind of just ask her questions about what Cuba was like, you know, what it was like for her to leave during the revolution and come to this completely different country, United States. And I found that that was one of the better ways that that people can appreciate history, right is like we, as people, we are designed to care about people. But in high school, we tend to just, you know, we get out of textbook, we'll look at this textbook, we'll have like reading assignments every week, we have I don't know, it read a chapter about some part of the American Civil War, the causes leading to the Civil War, and we had these big, authoritative textbooks that are trying to explain to us how history unfolded when you know, that stuff isn't naturally interesting to anybody. You know, it's not like reading through statistics, or reading through dates and saying, Oh, geez, here's what happened this, at this time, this part of the country, and here's what happened this time, this other part of the country, that's not what we're designed to care about. We care about his personal history, right? We care about our family history, we care about reading inspirational stories of, I don't know, Theodore Roosevelt, or whoever you actually care about, like you want to read history, through biography, really. And biography I think, is one of the better ways that we can have people actually appreciate history and understand it. For me, I've always enjoyed biography I used as a child, I read a couple of biographies one of them about, or not couple of I read a lot of biographies. But I read biographies of Albert Einstein that particularly affected me about Nelson Mandela, and all these great historical figures that really just inspired me and made me want to, you know, dig into the dig into their histories, right? That's what I think that's what I think one of the better parts about biography is that you can, it serves as like a place a foothold for you to get into a subject, right? Like, let's say you don't necessarily know much about, I don't know, modern Indian history. And of course, everybody has heard of Mahatma Gandhi. So if you read a biography of Mahatma Gandhi, you learn about a lot of the crucial, crucial events that occurred that led to India becoming its own country, right? but not necessarily. But of course, this is looking through the vein of one person. And you also just basically, everything is connected to everything, right. So if you read it, if you're reading about Mahatma Gandhi, and you learn about his marriage, or his relationships with women, that's like a jumping off point for you to go investigate, you know, Indian social history and Indian sociology and things like that.
That's why I think that we really need to review how we approach teaching history in schools, because, you know, a lot of people will say, oh, people just don't have an appreciation for history anymore. When I think that's just a failing of us as educators, well, I'm not a system, that I'm not necessarily an educator, but this is the failure of our system to try to get people to appreciate history in a way that is, that is natural for human beings, right? You know, you can give us all the statistics you can you want, you can try to lay out this linear narrative about what happened and how people did something. And but I think, naturally, people just don't, they don't appreciate that. Which is, which is completely fine, right? Because the way that we teach history is not, you know, it doesn't, it's not necessarily the best way to teach it, right? There are just so many ways that we could advance understanding and appreciation for history that I could, that would actually sort of improve public consciousness of all these different things, you know, a lot of I don't know, I'm some level, I'm kind of skeptical of, there's sort of this this thing out in the world that says that you can, if people just understood history, if we, you know, if we look back at the Romans, or at the ship, the Chinese or whatever, you can see the sort of the things that occur in history and how to like, how to, you know, not repeat our failures, but I'm pretty skeptical of that. So I'm, my view of history is that it's a, it's interesting in and of itself, like, there's not necessarily a instrumental reason for you to read history. A lot of people say that history is one of the most important things for them when they're making decisions, right, in terms of it gives them context for different stuff that happens, which I don't I don't necessarily, I don't disagree with that. But it's not the main stop the main interest for me, I just think that human history is one of his, it's like one of the most interesting subjects out there, right? Like when you're going out and to say, yeah, so I'm sitting in my apartment in downtown Houston. And I walk outside, and I get on the train, and I look at all these buildings around me, and I see all the activity that's going on in the city. And then if you have a historical appreciation for what the city was on, is becoming, it's like it's having that appreciation makes you really understand the places you are more intimately and it makes you appreciate your standing in life in general, with a more nuanced view, right? Like, if you think about what Houston was, even like, 100 years ago, it's a completely different city from where we are now. Yet, it's still extensively the same city, right? But if you don't have an appreciation for history, you don't see how radically things change. Right, you may sort of get stuck into this in this view that you that that that it's hard to change, anything political systems can't change overnight, which is true. But if you look at history, you see how radically things have changed. And you see, you see that a lot more things are in the realm of the possible than we believe to be in the moment, right? Like you can complain about the president or whatever we're talking about under current events, and we think that can lead to apathy. But if you have an appreciation, I keep saying appreciation for history. But whatever it is, it's what I'm talking about. Right? If you haven't appreciated the history, if you understand how drastically things have changed in the past 2000 years, or even the past 500 years of the rise of the modern state, you see that things are really, things can change. And they can they can really change in a in a tremendous way. And that's why I think history is kind of important. And so if history is important in that way, in terms of giving us perspective for what is going on in our modern day, modern day world world and what our world may be going to, it is important that we teach history in a way that makes people just enjoy it. I mean, you can we have our instruments or reasons as I just went through. But the instrumental reasons aren't, in my opinion, the most important things, most important things is just making. I don't know, maybe, maybe you don't need to learn history. But for me, I love history. So I think the best way to learn history is through biography, as I mentioned earlier, and I think biography is, as I mentioned, it's just sort of a way that you can, it's it's really the most important part of it is that it's a foothold into pretty much literally any subject. So I recently read this book called The power broker by Robert Caro about Robert Moses, who is a city planner, and bureaucrats in New York City. And his life was incredible in terms of how much it's changed all of American infrastructure, he was sort of the the main guy that, that thought that we need to, you know, we did, we need to stick out, put all of our frickin people in cars, we need to stick them on highways, we need to tear up our cities and put all these friggin highways here. And his life story, as shown through all the tremendous work that Robert Carroll did to get this history out of him was like, mind opening in terms of, you've had this one guy who knows, nobody's really heard of, but and then you read this book, and you see the effects of his career on all of American society and makes you I don't know, that's like, really, it's both inspiring, and kind of terrifying, because it's, it shows that any one person who you may not necessarily see in, like the normal historical record can have these tremendous impacts on their society. And, and it just makes it more interesting as you're reading through his, you're reading through a person's life, right. And, as I said earlier, we're just, we're just inclined to attached to personal narratives more so than grand historical arcs, and then this country rose, and then this country came to destroy them. And then, you know, the ship, the whole, you know, ships were invented or whatever, like, there's, that that's not something that naturally comes to us. But if you have, if you're looking through Robert Moses, his life, and you see, you see just the human element, that gives you a greater appreciation for history just by itself, right? Because we in high school or not in schooling, and in terms of just how we think about history, we think of it in very abstract, sort of, not easy to understand terms that are just that aren't useful, in my opinion, like they don't like sure you can make a person memorize all these dates of like the American Civil War, the Revolutionary War, like what happened here, and blah, blah, blah. But that's not, that's not what we want to really get out of history. But we want to get if history is just a better appreciation for the ways that human experience can occur. And that's what that looks, that's, that's my approach to what history should be. And that's why I think biographies, probably one of the best ways to do that is because as you're focusing on the single individual, you see, it opens you up to how grand and how much information is stored in history generally, right. And it makes you also more skeptical of grand server narratives in general, it just shows how much nuance and how much how much filtering and how much stuff has to be thrown away in order for us to even get out this sort of historical idea of like, and this is what happened here. And this is what happened here. And even for like the most well, recorded events in history, there's just so much that is hidden from us just by the vicissitudes of history occurring, because time is an arrow, right? You can't, if you could record everything that happened, right, you would be recording the whole universe of happening. And that's not, that's obviously not possible. So looking through looking through the lens of biography, both it it's sort of, I don't know, it's just, it's, it's mind expansion, and I'm like, a not sort of, like, I'm not trying to be, you know, whoo, like, oh, it just opens your mind, bro. Know, what it does is it's just,it's, it gives you a better, it helps you really understand that history, or that the historical narratives that we are given are not foolproof, right? And that they are obviously missing out on so much of the human experience. And that's why I think that, in order for us to really teach history in a way that is intuitive, and that gives people that inspire people to do learning on their own. We have to let them read biography, or maybe not even read just read biography, like if we change our classes to sort of, like maybe you want to teach American history, you can teach American history through the lens of the important people at different parts of American history. Course, that could lead you to the fallacy, the big man theory of history sort of fallacy, which I don't agree with, but I don't think you'd have to, I don't think that's necessarily something you have to do. Like it doesn't reading biography does not does not lead you to this theory of history as being focused on the individual. If anything, I think it shows you how, how, just how much coincidence plays into what happens in history. Like, if we look at, if you look at the life of unreal, I'm reading a biography of Napoleon right now. Right. And if you see his rise is spectacular Isaac in the 20s, from like an artillery officer from Corsica, not even from France. But then rising and becoming this brilliant general that's won so many victories, your fans becomes the first console and becomes the fucking Emperor, right? It's like that was only possible in the context of the French Revolution in terms of, you know, knocking out the French Revolution occurring, and so many people leaving the officer corps, that young generals, brilliant generals, like Napoleon could actually be, could be, could rise up the ranks. Whereas in the past, we were looking at living under this on cn, regime sort of thing, it's so much, there's so much, you know, the nobility of the people that are going to be in the officer corps, whereas this random dude from fucking Corsica becomes like, the greatest general in French history and becomes possibly one of the greatest Emperor's you know, like, and he's in the vein of Julius Caesar, and things like that. So that's, yes, he's a great person. But you if you look at the context behind all of his victories, and you look at the content when his rise, there's so much, there's so much coincidence, there's so much just happenstance that you can bet it that if you talk like French history, from the vape, from the view of, I don't know, if you look at it, you look at Napoleon's life, and you follow that to read about the Imperial era. Yes, you can. If you have a bad biographer, who is whose ideology is that he's like, the greatest General of all time, whatever, that he did all these great things, and that's why France did this. If you have a good biographer, though, you can see that there's just so much luck, luck. That's the word I'm looking for this luck and chance is what is what history is about. 