---
published: false
---
## A New Post

Enter text in [Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/). Use the toolbar above, or click the **?** button for formatting help.

I'm going to discuss why I read. I recently listened to a podcast with Russ Roberts and Andy Matuschak on EconTalk, where they discusses why books are not a great way for people to learn things, which I think is probably true. The conversation got me thinking about why I  read in the first place. It's my main hobby. I'm a PhD student right now. After I get off work, I will eat dinner and then read for around 2 to 3 hours. I read a lot of nonfiction. And I used to read pretty much exclusively nonfiction for like the past couple years, but I've been adding in fiction recently. Sorry, for the everyday color science fiction or something, something like that. But I read mostly, I think it's just it is entertainment. You know, I I like to learn about Honestly, I don't really, when I just try to describe what I enjoy reading nonfiction why's that there's not really a particular thread that works through all of them that like I could easily identify saying, This is what I like. I mean, I read a whole bunch of history. I guess that's probably the biggest side is I love history. So I read a whole a whole bunch of history, a lot of biography does I mentioned in my earlier blog, posting biographies, the best way to think about history really. I read about complexity. I'm not a complexity scientist or anything like that. But I've been interested in the whole complex adaptive systems sort of new paradigm and scientifically side read a lot of stuff in that, that realm, read a lot of urban ism, sort of stuff about cities. And then fiction, wiser read science fiction, now I've been trying to get into classical literature. And, really, there's, like I said, there's not like a super thread that goes through all of the stuff that I read, but it's all about just like, as I'm explaining, I don't even have really have a good reason for why I do it.

Like, I'm not my, it's not a it's not a sort of instrumental thing for like, I'm not trying to learn to get a competitive edge over anybody. I do know that I pick up stuff from reading. I'm not like other people who will, you know, take notes, and they'll review what they learned from the book. And then, you know, like, they highlight and underline and all those sorts of shit, I don't do any of that. Basically, what I do, like, I don't touch the book, I just read it. I don't write down notes, I don't take anything like that. I just sort of sit there and absorb it. And I let I let the I let the content sort of just flow by me. And I will like I of course I think about it is everybody thinks about all the stuff that they do. But I'm not like conscientiously trying to pick up a message or something that I can apply to a tool belt or anything like that, because I'm not really I'm not systematic like that, I don't care to do it. But I do just enjoy the act of reading. Maybe it's also sort of a kind of a meditative practice in some way, like a, it's a way for me to just sort of get out of my everyday life and just dive into some completely random subject, like, you know, I became obsessed with Napoleon recently. And I read a great biography of him and just diving into the early 1820, sort of French Napoleonic era was just fascinating, great. And I learned, I like I said, I don't know if I learned a lot. But what I did was, I just picked up an understanding for Napoleon as a person, And just appreciated sort of how, how great of a dude, this guy was, you know.

And this was the same thing I did in my last blog post was, but what I, what I do enjoy about reading is that it does just open you up to completely different experiences that you wouldn't otherwise know. You know, people talk about fiction in that vein, well, they'll say, oh, by reading fiction, you can you learn about how other people think. And that's true. I think nonfiction is really even a bigger thing, a more powerful way for you to get this understanding. Because, you know, fiction, you're like, Okay, I know, this isn't real. So This is like a novel thing. But when you pick up something, When you pick up nonfiction, you read about, I don't know, like, fucking five, hundreds Africa or something, you realize just how much stuff there is in the world to know, you know, like, there's not like, and how interconnected everything is, like, you know, as I read history, I'll, you know, they, you know, there's a saying that history isn't, This isn't repeats itself, but it rhymes. And I do think that's, that's true, like, there are sort of archetypes or similar trends that run through history, of course, You can't. It's not like a deterministic thing where like, you see, if you see something at this point in history, you know that something is going to happen. That's not that's, that doesn't work. But you do see threads, and it really does kind of, I read it just for like the wonder of it, you know, just like looking at all this history, looking at what's happened in the past. And then you go back to your everyday life, and you're just like, Jesus Christ man, like we have, we are just working, we have this very small sliver of time that we're that is actually occurring. Now. We have all this history and all this really crazy stuff. And I'll let people know about that's just back there and books and that that happened, you can't you don't understand. 

You know, it's it. It's wonder I guess it's sort of like, I guess, I guess it is sort of really a meditative sort of spiritual experience for me reading, because it just opens up my mind, it opens up myself to a whole nother level of experience that I just didn't get before.I think when I first began to read, seriously, like I was saying was probably in high school, I was introduced to Orientalism by Edward side, I don't know if it was from one of my, my friends, or if I just was picking it up, and I read it in it. It sort of captured me. And that sort of got me on, like the whole intellectual book trend. And at that point, I think there was sort of a thing, like I just wanted to learn. Like, there was, I don't know, if I had like, a particular objective in mind, but I wanted to learn so I thought it would prove useful in the future, but I've sort of shifted my, my thinking to be more just like, the act of reading is It opens you up to a whole bunch of different things. And it's just entertainment. You know, like, it's not. I don't know, I don't I don't like putting myself on a system. I don't like having being to do things. And you know, I don't like making myself want to, you know, feel like I have to do anything, right, like, I have to fucking read in order to learn. I don't know how to improve myself, I don't, I don't really buy that.

In terms of the other sorts of things that I that I read to do, as I guess, at this point, I'm sort of reading more for erudition, sort of, you know, it's a pretentious thing, but I like, I just like being aware and knowing a lot of things. There's not, They're really just I keep repeating this, but there's no instrumental reason, really, for me to be doing what I'm doing, you know, like, what I'm research wise, I'm doing pretty much hard to science. You know, some people may want to make the argument that interdisciplinary, reading is useful. And I always I'm not sure if that's so much true. In terms of the stuff I read, I read a lot of, like I said, history and some sort of like philosophical novels, Some books that are just like philosophy, sort of stuff that aren't super ethical to my things, but just a passion I have. And I guess that's why I'm sort of trying to talk about I'm trying to think through why I do like I've always read Think I first began to read as, I don't even know how old I was three, or four or something. At least my parents always said that I would read and I don't really have strong memories of my childhood, but the memories I do have are associated. I do have books that I read, like I read a lot of fantasy when I was in middle school, I didn't play a lot of sports, I read a lot of books. I I read a lot of biography as I as a kid, I read a lot of fantasy, I don't know I read a whole bunch of things and I don't know where I picked up the bug form or or why I do it. I just it's just something that's always been a part of my life to to dive into a book and I guess sort of maybe it's maybe it was sort of an escape Escape from your everyday life and just dive into a completely different subject to get a completely different time but can completely different person, You know, that's probably the biggest reason I'd say is it's an escape for me.

Of course, I I do pick up things you know, I know a lot of shit. But it's not. It's not there's no like rhyme or reason for why why I why I do that sort of thing. It's just sort of always been something I've been interested in.
